I'm Gad alus welcome to the program
Israel's prime minister Benjamin
netanyahu's office has announced the
temporary opening of a border crossing
to allow Aid into Gaza the opening of
the Ares Crossing into the Palestinian
territories North was among several
steps approved by Israel's cabinet to
increase the flow of humanitarian
assistance the news was welcomed in
Washington where President Joe Biden had
earlier told Netanyahu in a phone call
that further us support for Israel's war
in Gaza depended on such steps Biden
also said Israel must take more action
to prevent civilian deaths relations
between the two allies have soured since
Monday's killing of seven Aid workers in
an Israeli air strike in
Gaza speaking at a NATO meeting in
Brussels US Secretary of State Anthony
blinkin called on Israel to do more to
protect civilians and allow access to
humanitarian Aid we need to an immediate
ceasefire to enable the release of
hostages but also to enable um a
dramatic surge in humanitarian
assistance uh as well as obviously
better protecting um civilians now uh as
I said the president and the Prime
Minister just spoke but it's uh our
expectation that um Israel uh will and
certainly should announce concrete
specific me measurable steps that uh it
will take and take as soon as possible
uh to make sure that there can be an
effective Surge and assistance that it
can be sustained uh and that
humanitarian workers and civilians are
better
protected DW correspondent Tanya ker
joins us now from Jerusalem Tanya what
more can you tell us about these these
new steps to let Aid into
Gaza well as you said this announcement
by the Israeli cabinet came uh after
this phone call between US President Joe
Biden and prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu and I think the most
significant as you said is the reopening
at least for some time of the Aris
Crossing that is a Crossing in the north
it has been in the past used by
humanitarian workers but also by
journalists we went through there uh
going into Gaza diplomats and also
Palestinian patients uh going out from
Gaza uh this is significant because uh
when you cross the area Crossing uh It
Takes by car about 10 minutes uh to
reach the out outskirts of Gaza City
passing the town of B hanon and of
course right now we're expecting that
you know the infrastructure and roads
are heavily damaged but this will have
to be taken care of and it would help uh
those eight convoys uh eight
organizations have said you know they
rarely go into uh the north of Gaza
because of various reasons uh they could
be uh now reaching the area much faster
and that is very important because
especially in Northern Gaza the
situation is critical for the people uh
that have uh remained there in addition
to that uh the cabinet announced that
more humanitarian Aid would be going
through the ashdot port the Israeli Port
which is also close uh to uh in close
proximity by Road uh to the areas
Crossing in the north of Gaza and also
that more humanitarian Aid would be
coordinated through Jordan WIA the land
route and then going through Kim Shalom
now this of course looks first of all
good on paper now of course it needs to
be seen you know how much uh this will
actually increase the aid and delivery
also of commercial Goods going into Gaza
in the coming
days uh this followed Biden's call with
Netanyahu in which Biden also called for
an immediate ceasefire will Israel
listen to
that well I think I mean it's a bit in
the wording and I think we've seen here
uh in this call we understand from
American officials that US President Joe
Biden was very upset what happened uh to
the aid workers of uh the world Central
Kitchen you know in in in the tone and
as indicating that there could be a
change in a US policy with respect to
Gaza as was uh written in the readout of
this call it will be determined it said
quote by the assessment of Israel's
immediate action immediate action uh on
these steps and we heard also uh US
Secretary blinken before uh you know
they made it clear they need to be
specific and concrete and measurable
measurable steps for the civilian
population uh but also uh to protect uh
uh um the aid workers working in Gaza in
addition to calling for an immediate
ceasefire and to come to conclusion uh
in these hostage talks we have we have
to wait and see if if this will have any
impact our correspondent T they
reporting from Jerusalem thank you
Tanya now let's bring in y Tilman he's
the Middle East program director at the
international crisis group and he joins
us from Brussels uh yours more Aid to
come to Gaza are you optimistic or is it
just good on
paper well I'm optimistic that in fact
more Aid will come to Gaza but um I'm
not optimistic in the sense that it's
still way too little uh Gaza is facing
uh and is already undergoing Parts uh
famine uh people are starving to death
uh and um the aid that trickling in is
really far in far too insufficient to
take care of all the people who are in
desperate need of food so yes it's a
step forward but it's really not enough
uh do you think that Israel has
succumbed to the pressure from the US to
protect civilians
better well s is too strong a word for
me I think Israel is giving into some
pressure uh to some of the pressure in
order to uh increase very gradually very
slowly uh and very minimally uh Aid to
to starving Palestinians um but uh more
pressure will be needed uh and maybe
some more some some more concrete action
on the part of the United States in
order to uh press Israel to to
completely open up the uh the territory
to the kind of Aid to the kind of
volumes of Aid that are now required now
given all this pressure do you think
will see Israel scale down its Gaza
operations uh because it fears that more
mistakes could alienate them from their
Partners even
further you know it's a very difficult
thing because I think prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu doesn't want to end
the war in Gaza short of having
destroyed Hamas which has been the war
objective from the very beginning and in
a way the United States agrees with that
objective but not at the cost of
destroying Gaza and his population and I
think prime minister Netanyahu doesn't
necessarily care so much about what
happens to the population so it's a very
difficult balance for him now he may
have to scale down but he doesn't want
to end it uh and so he's in a bind and I
think he also believes that the longer
he can keep the war going uh the more
secure his own position is as prime
minister and I think from from his part
President Biden is trying to squeeze him
so that he eventually will have to step
down uh and a new government will come
in place in Israel that will be a little
bit more amenable to us pressure oh that
LE leads me straight to my next question
as you mentioned Nan has been under
pressure from several sides both inside
and outside of Israel uh and they also
have been calls for SNAP parliamentary
elections and even for his removal uh is
iser of that likely to
happen well the thing is I think uh
prime minister Netanyahu popularity has
taken a nose dive um compared with some
of the other candidates who were there
but that said um his uh Coalition still
has majority support in Parliament so
whatever regardless of his personal
popularity will be difficult to uh move
to elections when he still enjoys a
majority so something else would have to
happen to to trigger that uh now um
clearly there's the population is asking
for new elections so or parts of the
population so we'll have to see uh
whether that pressure builds to the
point that actually they will trigger uh
that your sand there the Middle East
program director at the international
crisis group thank you very much for
sharing your expertise with
us thank
you